---
layout: default
title: Ransomware
description: Data Breaches and Data Leaks
heading: Data Breaches and Data Leaks
sub_heading: Data Breaches and Data Leaks

---

# Data Breaches and Data Leaks

## Who in law enforcement should be contacted in the event of a data breach or data leak?

Since most jurisdictions do not state whom specifically to notify in the event of a data breach or data leak, the best place to start is often local law enforcement.<sup>30</sup> In some cases, though, working with federal agencies might be necessary, depending on the nature and scope of the issue.<sup>31</sup> For data breaches concerning credit card fraud, the Secret Service is the agency that will typically take an interest.<sup>32</sup> For other fraudulent activity, such as bank account hacking, the FBI will be the most engaged.<sup>33</sup> For breaches involving mail theft, victims should contact the U.S. Postal Inspection Service.<sup>34</sup> While data breach notification statutes vary by state, most states require a business to send a letter to each data breach victim in the state where the victim resides.<sup>35</sup>

Georgia’s statute does not require notification to any agency or the state attorney general; instead, information brokers or data collectors must notify individuals whose PI has been compromised, and nationwide consumer reporting agencies must be notified if the breach concerns more than 10,000 individuals. Mishandling notifications can lead to consequences such as fines, reputational damage, and enforcement actions.<sup>36</sup> Georgia’s statute provides specific guidelines concerning the contents of a notice of security breach, but generally individuals must either be provided written notice, electronic notice, or notice via telephone unless substitute notice is necessary.<sup>37</sup> Notification of a data breach may be delayed if a law enforcement agency determines that the notification will compromise a criminal investigation, in which case notification must be made “after the law enforcement agency determines that [the notification] will not compromise the investigation.”<sup>38</sup>

Georgia also has data breach notification requirements specific for telecommunication companies. Under this law, notification is required in the event of a “breach of telephone records,” defined as “the unauthorized acquisition of telephone records that compromises the security, confidentiality, or integrity of that information as maintained by the telecommunications company.”<sup>39</sup> That same law also includes username and passwords, account number, account passwords, or identification numbers or other access codes even when not in connection with the individual’s name, if the information compromised would be sufficient to perform or attempt to perform identity theft against the person whose information was compromised.<sup>40</sup> In the event of a breach of a telephone record concerning a Georgia resident, the telecommunications company must provide notice to the resident immediately following discovery or notification of a breach that is reasonably likely to cause measurable harm to the Georgia resident.<sup>41</sup>

Telecommunications carriers also have breach notification responsibilities under Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations, which require electronic notice to the USSS and the FBI if a carrier determines that a person, unauthorized or exceeding authorization, has intentionally accessed, used, or disclosed customer proprietary network information (CPNI)—which includes sensitive personal information about the carriers’ customers.<sup>42</sup> Law enforcement must be notified no later than seven business days after the breach, at which point the customers whose CPNI has been breached must also be notified.<sup>43</sup>

The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, implemented by the FTC, provides breach-notification requirements for certain types of financial service companies.<sup>44</sup> Financial companies that have a duty to provide notice under this Act are those entities that are governed by the Interagency Guidelines Establishing Information Security Standards promulgated by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the Thrift Supervision Office.<sup>45</sup> In the event of a breach, these covered institutions must (1) notify consumers if their PI is subject to a compromise that poses a significant risk of identity theft or related harm; (2) notify law enforcement if the breach might involve criminal activity or there is evidence that the breach has resulted in identity theft or related harm; (3) notify the credit bureaus and other businesses that might be affected by the breach; and (4) check to see if breach notification is required under applicable state law.<sup>46</sup> Additionally, financial institutions subject to the Bank Secrecy Act are required to file Suspicious Activity Reports (SAR) to report certain suspected violations of law or suspicious activity, including incidents of identity theft.<sup>47</sup> Mortgage lenders, real estate brokers, and broker dealers registered with the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FIRNA) must notify FIRNA and the FBI of any data breaches.<sup>48</sup> Organizations that accept credit or debit card charges as payment for goods or services will have certain obligations to the credit card issuer or issuing bank. These obligations include complying with the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standards (PCI-DSS)—but compliance agreements with PCI-DSS are contractual, not statutory.<sup>49</sup>

The HIPAA Breach Notification Rule, 45 CFR §§ 164.400-414, requires HIPAA-covered entities and their business associates to provide notification following a breach of unsecured PHI. Similar breach notification provisions implemented and enforced by the FTC apply to vendors of personal health records and their third party service providers.<sup>50</sup> A breach under the HIPAA Rules is defined as “the acquisition, access, use, or disclosure of PHI in a manner not permitted under the HIPAA Privacy Rule which compromises the security or privacy of the PHI.”<sup>51</sup> In the event of a breach of unsecured PHI, covered entities must notify affected individuals in written form by first-class mail or by email if the affected individuals have agreed to receive electronic notice.<sup>52</sup> If ten or more affected individuals have out-of-date or insufficient contact information, then individual notice can be substituted by either posting the notice on the home page of the covered entity’s website for at least 90 days or by providing the notice in major print or broadcast media where the affected individuals likely reside.<sup>53</sup> The covered entity must include a toll-free phone number that remains active for at least 90 days where individuals can learn if their information was involved in the breach.<sup>54</sup> If there are fewer than ten individuals with insufficient contact information, the covered entity can provide substitute notice by an alternative form of written notice, by telephone, or by other means.<sup>55</sup> These individual notifications must be provided without unreasonable delay and in no case later than 60 days following the discovery of a breach.<sup>56</sup>

The HIPPA Breach Notification Rule also sometimes requires notification to the media.<sup>57</sup> Notification to the media occurs when covered entities experience a breach affecting more than 500 residents of a state or jurisdiction and should come in the form of a press release to appropriate media outlets serving the affected area.<sup>58</sup> Like individual notice, this media notification must be provided without unreasonable delay and in no case later than 60 days following the discovery of a breach and must include the same information required for the individual notice.<sup>59</sup>

In addition to notifying affected individuals and the media (where appropriate), covered entities must notify the Secretary of Health and Human Services of breaches of unsecured protected health information.<sup>60</sup> If a breach affects 500 or more individuals, covered entities must notify the Secretary without unreasonable delay and in no case later than 60 days following a breach. If, however, a breach affects fewer than 500 individuals, the covered entity may notify the Secretary of these breaches on an annual basis.<sup>61</sup>

If a breach of unsecured PHI occurs at or by a business associate, the business associate must notify the covered entity following the discovery of the breach.<sup>62</sup> A business associate must provide notice to the covered entity without unreasonable delay and no later than 60 days from the discovery of the breach.<sup>63</sup> If possible, the business associate should provide the covered entity with the identification of each individual affected by the breach as well as any other available information required to be provided by the covered entity in its notification to affected individuals.<sup>64</sup>


## What kinds of breaches or leaks determine an obligation to report?

There is no uniform definition of PI, but for most states and industries it includes an individual’s first and last name, social security number, financial account number and its password or PIN, medical or mental health information, username or email address with a password to access an online account, and driver’s license or state identification number.<sup>65</sup> For most states, there is a safe harbor from data breach liability and no obligation to report if PI is redacted or encrypted (so long as the encryption key has not been stolen).<sup>66</sup> Additionally, for most states, PI does not include public information that is lawfully made available to the general public from federal, state, or local government records.<sup>67</sup>

In Georgia, PI means an individual’s first name or first initial and last name, in combination with at least one of the following data elements, when either the name or the data elements are not encrypted or redacted: (1) a social security number, a driver’s license number, or state identification card number; (2) an account number, credit card number, or debit card number, if the number could be used without additional identifying information, access codes, or passwords; and (3) account passwords or personal identification numbers or other access code.<sup>68</sup> There is a safe harbor in Georgia for encrypted information, with notice required only for a breach of “unencrypted personal information.”<sup>69</sup>

The type of data breach or leak can also determine whether reporting is required by law. The majority of states and industries provide that there is no duty to report a breach if, after a reasonable investigation by the business or consultation with law enforcement, it can be reasonably determined that the breach has not and will not cause financial harm to the affected individual, result in identity theft or fraud, or lead to other misuse of the breached PI.<sup>70</sup> Moreover, most states and industries have a “good faith” exception, which states that there is no need for notification if PI was accessed or acquired by an employee or agent of the business in good faith.<sup>71</sup> Typically, this exception applies only if the employee’s acquisition of PI relates to or furthers a legitimate business purpose and is not subject to further unauthorized use or exposure.<sup>71</sup> Georgia is one of the states that has a “good faith” exception, but it applies only to information brokers and data collectors.<sup>73</sup>

With state laws, federal laws, and industry standards overlapping, when are businesses and organizations ever exempt from adhering to data breach or leak requirements? In some states with general data breach reporting laws, companies that are subject to other laws (such as the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act or HIPAA), or to state or federal regulators that address breaches, are either deemed to be in compliance with, or exempted from, some or all of the state’s breach notification requirements.<sup>74</sup> Under Georgia’s data breach notification statute concerning information brokers and data collectors, there is no express safe harbor for federally regulated entities. However, information brokers, data collectors, and telecommunications companies in Georgia are deemed to be in compliance with the notification requirements of this statute if they maintain their own notification procedures as part of an information security policy for the treatment of PI and are otherwise consistent with the timing requirements of the state statute.<sup>75</sup>

## Does Commercial-off-the-shelf software (COTS) affect cybersecurity reporting and liability?

Another consideration for cybersecurity reporting is the type of software a business uses. Commercial-off-the-shelf software (COTS) products are products that are ready-made and sold as packages to fulfill business needs.<sup>76</sup> COTS software is a noticeable and attractive target for hackers because it is large, complex, and built with fragile and changing technology operating in complex environments that are also constantly changing.<sup>77</sup> It is also targeted because the liability of its developers is limited by law and by the low expectations of the customers.<sup>78</sup> Many software vendors provide public assertions of their security, but these are rarely detailed or measurable.<sup>79</sup> Most vendors publish little or nothing about their security-related coding practices, and installation manuals for COTS products are also light on discussions of security.<sup>80</sup> Product risks may include ineffective management of security patches and vulnerabilities, failure of business and functional requirements, and disparities between available controls and security needs.<sup>81</sup> As for liability, almost all COTS products software comes with a user agreement that unambiguously releases the vendor of any liability—direct or indirect—even if that failure is a consequence of a known flaw in the product.<sup>82</sup> With these limitations in mind, it is important for businesses to conduct online research focusing on security-related sites and user groups, collect data on past security problems, and consult experts (if necessary) to formulate questions for the vendor before purchasing a COTS product.<sup>83</sup>






 <span style="float:left;"> 
<a href="./ransomware.html">← What is ransomware?</a>
  </span> 
 <span style="float:right;">
  <a href=" ">Survey →</a>
  </span> 
<br />
<br />
