---
layout: default
title: Passwords 
description: 'How Passwords Work '

---
# How Passwords Work

Passwords are used to restrict access to content online. Let's develop an
analogy that will help you understand how they work, their shortcomings, and
consequently the risk you face. First, we start by thinking about a password as
a _key_. You create a password, a key, that unlocks the door to your account.

Notice that while we are used to buying locks with keys that fit them, with
passwords, you are actually responsible for creating a good key, while the
website is responsible for making a lock for it to fit. A simple or common
password, just like a simple or reused key, will result in a lock that is
easily picked.

We will talk about how to make strong passwords later, but we need to
acknowledge some additional differences between how we use locks and keys every
day, and how they work online.



Usually, you unlock your own house or car, right?  Online, you don't unlock
things yourself. Instead, you give your key to someone else to unlock your
account.

This is a very important difference that reveals other risks you face.



Every time you login to a website, you send your key across the internet to
the website's servers.

The internet is one massive "network" of computers. On computer networks, you
pass data from one computer to the next, until it reaches its destination.  In
our example, the destination is the web server.

You might imagine what additional risks you might face if you were to mail
someone a key.

<Password-SVG-Encrypted />

Unless your data is **encrypted**, any computer that forwards your data can see
your password.

You cannot control if the website supports encryption, but you should be aware
of whether your data is protected or not, i.e. if the website uses `https://`.

Thinking about passwords as keys will continue to be helpful as we talk about
password security.

Next, we will talk about common passwords. Imagine if there were only a few
dozen variations of keys for a lock. Intruders would find it easy to simply try
all of the possible keys.

<!-- blank line -->
<figure class="video_container">
  <iframe src="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1MER5_Qk6q6ERqUyqEIG9Ede2NPOJs_cg/preview" width="640" height="480"></iframe>
</figure>
<!-- blank line -->



[← Introduction](./password_introduction.html "Introduction ")

[Common Passwords →](./common_passwords.html "Common Passwords")
